Update and expand theory sections (#3114)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/hip/docs/understand/compilers.rst

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance is critical, and the target GPU architecture is known in advance.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime compilation is useful in development environments or when
distributing software that must run on a wide range of hardware without prior
knowledge of the GPU. It provides flexibility at the cost of some
performance overhead.
```

HIP compilers
********************************************************************************

> ROCm provides the compiler tools used to compile HIP applications for use on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROCm provides tools for compiling HIP applications for use on
```

> AMD GPUs. The compilers set up the default libraries and include paths for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AMD GPUs. The compilers set up the default libraries, and include paths for the
```

> HIP and ROCm libraries and some needed environment variables. For more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HIP and ROCm libraries, along with required environment variables. For more
```

For more information, see :doc:`HIP runtime compiler <../how-to/hip_rtc>`.

.. _gfx_ip:

Target GPU architectures (GFX IP)
=================================

> Instructions in the AMDGPU instruction set architecture (ISA) are compatible

Reviewer: Should AMDGPU be two words? Or does this represent something else? Driver?

Author: AMDGPU is the name of the LLVM backend which generates the machine code for AMD GPUs.

https://llvm.org/docs/AMDGPUUsage.html

only with certain physical GPU architectures. The versioning system that
abstracts hardware details from compilers and software is called the GFX IP
version. Each AMD GPU family, such as RDNA or CDNA, defines its own GFX IP
identifiers. These identifiers specify which instruction formats, memory
models, and compute features are supported by that generation of hardware.

A GFX version is expressed as a short string, for example:

> 

Reviewer: No spaces for CDNA or RDNA and the number:

<img width="210" height="595" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/20b61350-1351-4ffc-aabe-ee40b80a2ab3" />

Reviewer 2: Fixed.

``gfx942`` architecture include:

* ``v_add_f32 v0, v1, v2`` — add 32-bit floats in vector registers
* ``s_mov_b32 s4, 0x3f800000`` — move immediate value (1.0f) into a scalar
  register
* ``v_mfma_f32_16x16x4f16 v[0:15], v[16:31], v[32:47], v[0:15]`` — perform a
  16×16×4 matrix fused multiply-add
* ``s_barrier`` — synchronize all wavefronts in the work-group

In this syntax:

* ``v_`` instructions operate on vector registers (VGPRs) per thread.
* ``s_`` instructions operate on scalar registers (SGPRs) shared by the
  wavefront.
* Specialized matrix instructions (``v_mfma_*``) invoke the :ref:`Matrix Core
  (MFMA) hardware units <mfma_units>`.

Although AMDGPU assembly can be written by hand, this is uncommon. Developers typically inspect compiler‑generated assembly when optimizing kernels, diagnosing register pressure, or tuning memory‑access patterns

The ROCm disassembler (``llvm-objdump``) and ROCm profiler (``rocprofv3``)
allow inspection of generated GFX ISA alongside high-level HIP or OpenMP source
code. Because the instruction semantics and binary encodings are publicly
documented by AMD, the GFX ISA is a fully open, compiler-targetable standard.

> This openness allows tool developers, performance engineers, and researchers to
> reason about GPU behavior down to the instruction level, bridging the gap
> between hardware and high-level kernel code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This openness allows tool developers, performance engineers, and researchers to
reason about GPU behavior at the instruction level, bridging the gap
between hardware and high-level kernel code.
```

.. _amdgpu_ir:

AMDGPU intermediate representation
===================================

AMDGPU intermediate representation (AMDGPU IR) is an intermediate
representation for code that runs on AMD GPUs and other parallel processors. It
is one of the key outputs of the ROCm compiler toolchain, produced by
``amdclang++`` before being translated into architecture-specific GPU assembly
(:ref:`GFX ISA <amdgpu_assembly>`).

> AMD's documentation refers to this layer as both a virtual instruction set and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AMD documentation refers to this layer as both a virtual instruction set and
```

* The minor version encodes core feature updates within that family (for
  example, new :ref:`MFMA <mfma_units>` or :ref:`LDS <lds>` capabilities).
* The subminor version may specify packaging or stepping differences (for
  example, MI300A versus MI300X).

Each new generation introduces additional hardware features, for example,
mixed-precision MFMA instructions, asynchronous data movement engines, and
updated cache hierarchies, while maintaining broad forward compatibility for
code compiled at the intermediate representation (IR) level. When compiling GPU
programs with ``amdclang++``, the target GFX architecture determines the ISA
and hardware features available to the kernel.

For example, compiling for the MI300X would use:

.. code-block:: shell

  amdclang++ --offload-arch=gfx942 kernel.cpp -o kernel.out

The compiler uses this flag to emit optimized machine code for that GPU's
:ref:`compute units <compute_unit>`, matrix cores, and memory subsystem. The
GFX IP acts as a virtual hardware target, decoupling high-level programming
models (HIP, OpenMP, OpenCL) from the underlying physical GPU design.

While AMD does not explicitly name its compatibility model as "onion-layered,"

> the GFX IP system follows a similar principle: newer architectures typically

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the GFX IP system follows a similar principle: newer architectures generally
```

architecture <gfx_ip>` to ensure instruction compatibility and optimal
scheduling.

AMDGPU assembly is rich and expressive, exposing every level of GPU behavior:
scalar operations, vector math, memory access, synchronization, and
matrix-multiply instructions. A few examples of instructions from the
``gfx942`` architecture include:

* ``v_add_f32 v0, v1, v2`` — add 32-bit floats in vector registers
* ``s_mov_b32 s4, 0x3f800000`` — move immediate value (1.0f) into a scalar
  register
* ``v_mfma_f32_16x16x4f16 v[0:15], v[16:31], v[32:47], v[0:15]`` — perform a
  16×16×4 matrix fused multiply-add
* ``s_barrier`` — synchronize all wavefronts in the work-group

In this syntax:

* ``v_`` instructions operate on vector registers (VGPRs) per thread.
* ``s_`` instructions operate on scalar registers (SGPRs) shared by the
  wavefront.
* Specialized matrix instructions (``v_mfma_*``) invoke the :ref:`Matrix Core
  (MFMA) hardware units <mfma_units>`.

Although AMDGPU assembly can be written by hand, doing so is rare. Instead,
developers typically view or analyze compiler-generated assembly when
optimizing kernels, debugging register pressure, or tuning memory access

> patterns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although AMDGPU assembly can be written by hand, this is uncommon. Developers typically inspect compiler‑generated assembly when optimizing kernels, diagnosing register pressure, or tuning memory‑access patterns
```

The ROCm disassembler (``llvm-objdump``) and ROCm profiler (``rocprofv3``)
allow inspection of generated GFX ISA alongside high-level HIP or OpenMP source
code. Because the instruction semantics and binary encodings are publicly
documented by AMD, the GFX ISA is a fully open, compiler-targetable standard.

This openness allows tool developers, performance engineers, and researchers to
reason about GPU behavior down to the instruction level, bridging the gap
between hardware and high-level kernel code.

.. _amdgpu_ir:

AMDGPU intermediate representation
===================================

AMDGPU intermediate representation (AMDGPU IR) is an intermediate
representation for code that runs on AMD GPUs and other parallel processors. It
is one of the key outputs of the ROCm compiler toolchain, produced by
``amdclang++`` before being translated into architecture-specific GPU assembly
(:ref:`GFX ISA <amdgpu_assembly>`).

AMD's documentation refers to this layer as both a virtual instruction set and
a target-specific dialect of LLVM IR. From a programmer's perspective, AMDGPU
IR defines a virtual machine model for parallel thread execution: compilers and

> optimizers emit this IR knowing that it will execute with consistent semantics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
optimizers emit this IR with the expectation that it will execute with consistent semantics
```

across multiple generations of AMD hardware, including future architectures not
yet released.

This makes AMDGPU IR a "narrow waist" between software and hardware,
abstracting the details of the physical :ref:`compute units <compute_unit>`,
:ref:`wavefront <wavefront>` schedulers, and memory hierarchies, while still
providing explicit control over threads, registers, and memory spaces.

Unlike traditional CPU ISAs, AMDGPU IR is not executed directly. Instead, it is

> further compiled (just-in-time or ahead-of-time) into GFX ISA, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
further compiled (either just‑in‑time or ahead‑of‑time) into GFX ISA, the
```

can often be re-optimized and executed efficiently on newer hardware through
updated ROCm runtimes and drivers. Some exemplary fragments of AMDGPU IR:

.. code-block:: llvm

  ; declare usage of 64 vector registers
  !amdgpu.num_vgpr = !{i32 64}

  ; perform fused multiply-add
  %f5 = call float @llvm.fma.f32(float %f3, float %f4, float 1.5)

  ; read thread and workgroup indices
  %tid  = call i32 @llvm.amdgcn.workitem.id.x()
  %wgid = call i32 @llvm.amdgcn.workgroup.id.x()

These instructions represent operations in the virtual machine model:

* Registers are virtual VGPRs/SGPRs dynamically mapped to physical hardware
  registers by the compiler.
* Arithmetic and memory intrinsics (``llvm.fma``, ``llvm.amdgcn.buffer.load``)
  map one-to-one to GPU instructions.
* Built-in functions like ``llvm.amdgcn.workitem.id.x()`` access special
  per-thread state, such as the current thread or :ref:`work-group
  <work_group>` index.

The AMDGPU IR machine model reflects the hardware reality of AMD GPUs: a single
instruction stream drives a :ref:`wavefront <wavefront>` of 64 threads that
execute in lockstep on the SIMD pipelines, each maintaining its own register

> state but sharing program flow and :ref:`local memory <lds>`. Wavefronts

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
state while sharing program flow and :ref:`local memory <lds>`. Wavefronts
```

cooperate through the :ref:`Local Data Share (LDS) <lds>` and synchronize via

> barriers, the same abstractions visible in the high-level ROCm programming

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
barriers, the same abstractions exposed in the high-level ROCm programming
```

model.

Since AMDGPU IR is integrated with the open-source LLVM compiler
infrastructure, its syntax and semantics are well-documented and publicly
accessible. Developers can inspect, modify, or emit AMDGPU IR directly for
performance analysis, research, or custom toolchains.

.. _binary_utilities:

ROCm binary utilities
=====================

The ROCm binary utilities are a collection of command-line tools for examining
and manipulating GPU binaries produced by ``amdclang++`` or other ROCm build
tools. These utilities allow developers to inspect, disassemble, and analyze
AMDGPU code objects, the compiled GPU kernels embedded in host executables or
distributed as standalone ``.hsaco`` files.

The ``llvm-objdump`` utility provides multiple capabilities for analyzing GPU
binaries. With the ``--offloading`` flag, it can list and extract information

> about the contents of ROCm binaries, including code object metadata, kernel

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from the contents of ROCm binaries, including code object metadata, kernel
```
